docs: Adds Zenith docs (#6015)
dagger/dagger: docs/zenith/index.md

---
slug: /zenith
displayed_sidebar: "zenith"
---

# Dagger Documentation

{@include: ./partials/_experimental.md}

## What is Dagger?

> Dagger is an integrated platform to orchestrate the delivery of applications to the cloud from start to finish. The Dagger Platform includes the Dagger Engine, Dagger Cloud, and the Dagger SDKs.

Author: We talk about SDKs...should we also mention the CLI?

* Native language benefits: Use the same programming language to develop your application and its delivery tooling.
* Easy onboarding of new developers: If you can build, test and deploy - they can too.
* Caching by default: Dagger caches everything. Expect 2x to 10x speedups.
* Cross-team collaboration: Reuse another team's workflows without learning their stack.

### Benefits to platform teams

* Reduce CI lock-in: Dagger functions run on all major CI platforms - no proprietary DSL needed.
* Eliminate bottlenecks: Let application teams write their own functions. Enable standardization by providing them a library of reusable components.
* Save time and money with faster CI runs: CI pipelines that are "Daggerized" typically run 2x to 10x faster, thanks to caching and concurrency. This means developers waste less time waiting for CI, and you spend less money on CI compute.
* Benefit from a viable platform strategy: Development teams need flexibility, and you need control. Dagger gives you a way to reconcile the two, in an incremental way that leverages the stack you already have.

## How does it work?

> TODO

Author: @sipsma can you please add some info here, using https://docs.dagger.io/#how-does-it-work as a model?

Reviewer: Yep, there's definitely a few tweaks to make for modules and the fact that we're CLI-centric (rather than SDK-centric) in terms of what executes on the host now.

Will push an update tomorrow

Reviewer: @vikram-dagger Pushed an update for this. Not super happy w/ how the mermaid diagram renders (at least when I previewed it on github), but let me know what you think overall or any fixes we could make to improve its appearance.

Reviewer: The diagram looked extra bad in the preview deployment of the site so I pushed another improvement, which required that I removed `OCI runtime` unfortunately. Otherwise it was weirdly entangled:

<img width="627" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-02 at 1 03 05 AM" src="https://github.com/dagger/dagger/assets/30126853/34da2d30-e653-45f3-8c00-706fb661e00b">

Unfortunately the diagram is still cutting names off after the update:
<img width="763" alt="Screenshot 2023-11-02 at 1 09 59 AM" src="https://github.com/dagger/dagger/assets/30126853/d94513c5-4f45-4188-be46-e8f06ac9bdc2">

Not sure if I just need to shorten names even more or if there's other formatting options available I'm not aware of.

Author: Are you seeing the names being shortened in GitHub, or in the deploy preview? I just checked the deploy preview and it looks fine.

Author: @sipsma two comments:
- In the diagram and explanation, I'm not able to grok the relationship between the modules and the build/test/etc pipelines.
- In the explanation, I was confused by usage of "API" vs "function". Also, in some of the steps, I couldn't understand whether it was referring to the core API or the module API. I have made a few inline suggestions in an attempt to add greater precision, however please review as I may have misunderstood.

- Eliminate bottlenecks: Let application teams write their own functions. Enable standardization by providing them a library of reusable components.
- Save time and money with faster CI runs: CI pipelines that are "Daggerized" typically run 2x to 10x faster, thanks to caching and concurrency. This means developers waste less time waiting for CI, and you spend less money on CI compute.
- Benefit from a viable platform strategy: Development teams need flexibility, and you need control. Dagger gives you a way to reconcile the two, in an incremental way that leverages the stack you already have.

## How does it work?

```mermaid
graph LR;

program["Dagger CLI"]

engine["Dagger Engine"]

subgraph ModA["Module A"]
    FnA1["Function"]
    FnA2["Function"]
end

subgraph ModB["Module B"]
    FnB1["Function"]
    FnB2["Function"]
end

subgraph A["build pipeline"]
  A1[" "] -.-> A2[" "] -.-> A3[" "]
end

subgraph B["test pipeline"]
  B1[" "] -.-> B2[" "] -.-> B3[" "]
end

subgraph C["deploy pipeline"]
  C1[" "] -.-> C2[" "] -.-> C3[" "]
end

engine  <-..-> ModB

engine  <-..-> ModA

program -..-> engine
engine -..-> A1 & B1 & C1
```

> 1. You execute a Dagger CLI command like `call`, `shell`, `up`, etc. against a module.

Author: ```suggestion
1. You execute a Dagger CLI command like `call`, `shell`, `up`, etc. against a module. Each module exposes its own API (the "module API")
```

1. The CLI opens a new session to a Dagger Engine: either by connecting to an existing engine, or by provisioning one on-the-fly.

> 1. The CLI uses the built-in core API to load the module into its session, making the module's API available for calls. Each module uses an SDK, which is responsible for turning the module's source code into an executable format that interfaces with the Dagger Engine.

Author: ```suggestion
1. The CLI uses the built-in API (the "core API") to load the module into its session, making the module API available for calls. Each module uses an SDK, which is responsible for turning the module's source code into an executable format that interfaces with the Dagger Engine.
```

> 1. The CLI calls the requested APIs based on the user inputs to the command. The wire protocol used to communicate with the engine is private and not yet documented, but this will change in the future.

Author: 1. The CLI calls the requested APIs -> is this referring to the module API, core API or both?

> 1. The Dagger Engine executes the module in a container. The module itself is connected back to the same session and can use Dagger API calls. The module has access to the built-in core API and the APIs of any modules on which it has a declared dependency.

Author: ```suggestion
1. The Dagger Engine executes the module in a container. The module itself is connected back to the same session and can use both the core API and the API(s) of any module(s) on which it has a declared dependency.
```

> 1. When the Dagger Engine receives an API request, it computes a [Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Directed_acyclic_graph) of low-level operations required to compute the result, and starts processing operations concurrently.

Author: When the Dagger Engine receives an API request -> which API does this refer to?

> 1. The final result is returned back to the caller once resolved, making it available for further processing, including as input to other API calls.

Author: ```suggestion
1. The final result is returned back to the caller once resolved, making it available for further processing, including as input to API methods of other modules.
```
